Adds 2024 Iroha annual report (#214)
hyperledger/tsc: project-reports/2024/2024-annual-Hyperledger-Iroha.md

---
layout: default

> title: 2024 Annual Review Hyperledger Iroha

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Hyperledger Iroha 2024 Annual Review 
```

Reviewer: This one is optional, if the format requires the original phrasing, we can keep as-is.

parent: 2024
grand_parent: Project Updates
---

# Project Health

> Our LFX Insights page is available with an [old](https://insights-v2.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/iroha/trends?selectedDateFilterType=DATERANGE&selectedDateRangeKey=1Y) and [new](https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/foundation/hyp/overview?project=iroha&bestPractice=false&repository=all&dateFilters=Last%2012%20Months&dateRange=2023-02-02%20to%202024-02-01&compare=PP&granularity=month&hideBots=true) interface. It must be noted that it doesn't reflect the full image, as we have several SDKs ([`iroha-java`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-java), [`iroha-javascript`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-java)) and the documentation repositiory, [`iroha-2-docs`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-2-docs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our LFX Insights page is available with an [old](https://insights-v2.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/iroha/trends?selectedDateFilterType=DATERANGE&selectedDateRangeKey=1Y) and [new](https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/foundation/hyp/overview?project=iroha&bestPractice=false&repository=all&dateFilters=Last%2012%20Months&dateRange=2023-02-02%20to%202024-02-01&compare=PP&granularity=month&hideBots=true) interface. It must be noted that it doesn't reflect the whole picture, as we have several SDKs ([`iroha-java`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-java), [`iroha-javascript`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-java)) and the documentation repositiory, [`iroha-2-docs`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-2-docs).
```

> Our LFX Insights page is available with an [old](https://insights-v2.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/iroha/trends?selectedDateFilterType=DATERANGE&selectedDateRangeKey=1Y) and [new](https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/foundation/hyp/overview?project=iroha&bestPractice=false&repository=all&dateFilters=Last%2012%20Months&dateRange=2023-02-02%20to%202024-02-01&compare=PP&granularity=month&hideBots=true) interface. It must be noted that it doesn't reflect the whole picture, as we have several SDKs ([`iroha-java`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-java), [`iroha-javascript`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-java)) and the documentation repositiory, [`iroha-2-docs`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-2-docs).

Reviewer 2: It is lots of fun trying to find the best LFX Insights links to use!  After looking at the linked metrics in the report that used the two different LFX Insight versions, I generated my own using the latest LFX Insights version, one for all of 2022, and one for all of 2023.  Thus -- I got these links:

- https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/foundation/hyp/overview?project=iroha&bestPractice=false&repository=all&dateFilters=2022-01-01%20to%202022-12-31&dateRange=2022-01-01%20to%202022-12-31&compare=PP&granularity=month&hideBots=true

- https://insights.lfx.linuxfoundation.org/foundation/hyp/overview?project=iroha&bestPractice=false&repository=all&dateFilters=2023-01-01%20to%202023-12-31&dateRange=2023-01-01%20to%202023-12-31&compare=PP&granularity=month&hideBots=true

Two notes on the comment about the whole picture.  There is a typo in the `iroha-javascript` target. Regardless, using the links I used, the "repository" drop down (default `All`) does show the other repos are included in the metrics.

# Maintainer Diversity

Currently, the Iroha 2 core development team consists of:

* 9 Rust developers
* 2 full-time QA engineers
* 2 full-time technical writers
* 1 full-time Rust intern
* 1 community manager
* 1 project manager
* 1 DevOps

> The maintenance team is currently comprised of SORAMITSU employees. [Gregorz Bazior](https://github.com/baziorek) (Yonix Digital Systems, AGH University of Science and Technology) is interested in Iroha 2 and maintains Iroha 1. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maintenance team currently comprises SORAMITSU employees. [Gregorz Bazior](https://github.com/baziorek) (Yonix Digital Systems, AGH University of Science and Technology) is interested in Iroha 2 and maintains Iroha 1. 
```

> The community interest is rising and there are some minor community contributions. Moreover, our team started working with a new intern, [Asem Abdelhady](https://github.com/Asem-Abdelhady), who proved to be an effecient Rust developer. Diversity-wise, Kshitij Roodkee participates as a contributor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Community interest is rising, and there are some minor community contributions. Moreover, our team started working with a new intern, [Asem Abdelhady](https://github.com/Asem-Abdelhady), who proved an efficient Rust developer. Diversity-wise, Kshitij Roodkee participates as a contributor.
```

> To compare, [this year's](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md) `MAINTAINERS.md` file is available, as well as well as the [previous year's version](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/commit/522b27bbd73e9b7306e9d6e1b7d0d0eff122b5e0?short_path=39da3bd#diff-39da3bd6270d44ea37b6ed50bd42eeb9d93ac5e1639645871a69cbe08cbe29de). The number of active maintainers did not change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For comparison, [this year's](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/blob/main/MAINTAINERS.md) `MAINTAINERS.md`, as well as [last year's version](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/commit/522b27bbd73e9b7306e9d6e1b7d0d0eff122b5e0?short_path=39da3bd#diff-39da3bd6270d44ea37b6ed50bd42eeb9d93ac5e1639645871a69cbe08cbe29de) is available. The number of active maintainers stayed the same.
```

> After Iroha 2 is released, we expect more maintainers to join the project, as the mature Iroha 2 codebase would be more useful to the new projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After Iroha 2 is released, we expect more maintainers to join the project, as the mature Iroha 2 codebase would be more beneficial to new projects.
```

# Project Adoption

Since our acceptance into the Hyperledger Foundation, Iroha 2 has witnessed two critical adopters.

[Bokolo-cash](https://soramitsu.co.jp/bokolo-cash) is an initiative named after Bokolo, an ancient currency made from seashells that was once used in the Solomon Islands. The Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI) and Soramitsu have begun a Proof-of-Concept for a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). The CBSI logo uses Bokolo’s motif, which we have borrowed for our wallet app. A ceremony for the CBDC demonstration experiment took place on November 28, 2023. The Solomon Islands Prime Minister Manasseh Sogabare, Finance Minister Harry Kuma, Central Bank Governor Luke Forau, the representatives of the central banks of several countries, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Japan to the Solomon Islands Miwa Yoshiaki, the Cabinet Secretariat of the Government of Japan, and JICA attended the ceremony. As a Proof-of-Concept for a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC), Bokolo-cash explores use cases in domestic and foreign payments, including simulated international remittances.

> Further expanding our reach, [Fraud Intelligence Limited](https://soramitsu.co.jp/fil-2023-in-review), [GitHub](https://github.com/fraud-intelligence-limited), and [Documentation](https://fraud-intelligence-limited.github.io/) utilize Iroha 2 to combat fraud across different industries. This blockchain-based platform fosters secure and decentralized information exchange, empowering organizations to prevent potential fraudulent activities through real-time insights. Additionally, individual developers express keen interest in leveraging Iroha 2's capabilities, for instance, reliable operation on embedded systems, including distributed computing services for devices located on space satellites. This diverse adoption underscores our commitment to providing innovative and impactful solutions within the Hyperledger ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further expanding our reach, [Fraud Intelligence Limited](https://soramitsu.co.jp/fil-2023-in-review), [GitHub](https://github.com/fraud-intelligence-limited), and [Documentation](https://fraud-intelligence-limited.github.io/) utilizes Iroha 2 to combat fraud within the telecommunications industry. This blockchain-based platform fosters secure and decentralized information exchange, empowering organizations to prevent potential fraudulent activities through real-time insights. Additionally, individual developers express keen interest in leveraging Iroha 2's capabilities, for instance, reliable operation on embedded systems, including distributed computing services for devices located on space satellites. This diverse adoption underscores our commitment to providing innovative and impactful solutions within the Hyperledger ecosystem.
```

# Goals

## Performance Against Prior Goals

The development of the Iroha 2.0 MVP is ongoing, with the targeted release at the end of March 2024 in line with the agreed-upon product roadmap.

> Given this is the first Hyperledger Iroha Annual Report, there is no 2022 Annual Report to look back on. Instead, this section highlights the project's accomplishments in no particular order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given this is the first Hyperledger Iroha Annual Report, there is no 2022 Annual Report to look back on. Instead, this section highlights the project's accomplishments.
```

**New features**:

* Soft fork recovery
* Runtime-definable permissions
* Executor, a smart contract that functions as the backbone of Iroha 2
* Instruction visitor
* The server-side cursor for query batching
* `WSV` snapshots for fast restart without the block replay
* `WASM` permission validators

**Refactoring**:

> * The domains now have owners

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Domains now have owners
```

> * The layout of the Iroha 2 schema was simplified (every entry is unique)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Iroha 2 schema layout has been simplified (every entry is unique)
```

* The [`iroha_crypto`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev/crypto) crate superseded the Hyperledger Ursa dependency

> * Our team standardised the block layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Block layout has been standardised
```

> * Our team standardised the transaction layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Transaction layout has been standardised
```

> * Our team simplified the data model API and removed the expressions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The data model API has been simplified and expressions have been removed
```

* Kagami was refactored and split into `iroha_swarm` and `iroha_wasm_builder_cli`

Our team actively pursues enhancing community engagement, promoting Hyperledger Iroha 2 into the broader IT community, and collaborating with the Hyperledger PR team.

Despite facing challenges related to a shortage of high-quality and available development resources, the team remains dedicated to the original project direction. As we work towards the MVP release, addressing challenges and seeking additional support will be pivotal for the project's success.

> As stated above, this quarter marks a significant evolution in the development of Iroha cryptographic infrastructure: the complete removal of Ursa's dependency from Iroha 2, the integration of its code to the [`iroha-crypto`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev/crypto) package and the further refactoring of the cryptographic tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As stated above, this quarter marks a significant evolution for Iroha's cryptographic infrastructure development: the complete removal of Ursa's dependency from Iroha 2, the integration of its code to the [`iroha-crypto`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev/crypto) package, and the further refactoring of the cryptographic tooling.
```

Initially, Iroha 2 used Ursa as a core cryptographic library to leverage its secure and reusable features. In turn, Ursa worked as an abstraction over other cryptography libraries. Iroha 2 benefited from Ursa's high cryptographic security standards. This change also minimised the need for redundant cryptographic code.

At this point, the necessary parts of Ursa are detached and fully integrated. The refactoring of the [`iroha-crypto`](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/tree/iroha2-dev/crypto) library itself continues.

> The latest topic in Iroha's cryptographic infrastructure   addressed by our team is [#4181](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/4181); it allows the parsed keys to be stored instead of the raw bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The latest topic in Iroha's cryptographic infrastructure addressed by our team is [#4181](https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/pull/4181); it allows the parsed keys to be stored instead of the raw bytes.
```

## Next Year's Goals

> Our primary goal is to build upon the achievements of 2024 by successfully delivering the Hyperledger Iroha 2.0 MVP and stabilising its SDKs.

Reviewer 3: Do you mean 2023?

```suggestion
Our primary goal is to build upon the achievements of 2023 by successfully delivering the Hyperledger Iroha 2.0 MVP and stabilising its SDKs.
```

> Beyond this milestone, our focus with the development team will address functional deliverables not included in the MVP but are essential for the project's completeness in the post-production phase. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond this milestone, our focus with the development team will address functional deliverables not included in the MVP but essential for the project's completeness in the post-production phase. 
```

> Furthermore, we aspire to initiate the development of architectural upgrades, laying the groundwork for delivering Iroha 2.0 as a public blockchain. It is important to note that the Iroha 2 currently operates as a private blockchain, and the shift to a public blockchain will necessitate dedicated time for research and development. Additionally, we plan to incorporate a set of additional functional features in the post-release phase, strategically supporting the commercial efforts of Central Bank Digital Currency Proof of Concepts. We aim to advance our project's technical capabilities and foster its broader adoption and utility within the industry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, we aspire to begin developing of architectural upgrades, laying the groundwork for delivering Iroha 2.0 as a public blockchain. It is important to note that Iroha 2 currently operates as a private blockchain, and the shift to a public blockchain will require dedicated resources for research and development. Additionally, we plan to incorporate a set of additional functional features in the post-release phase, strategically supporting the commercial efforts of Central Bank Digital Currency Proof of Concepts. We aim to advance our project's technical capabilities and foster its broader adoption and utility within the industry.
```

> The users in our community express an interest in using Iroha's codebase as something that can reliably run on the embedded SoCs similar to those found in modern mobile phones. They could compile Iroha on different ARM SoCs with limited RAM and help test it in new conditions. While it isn't a priority, Rust allows such ports to function well, and the main concern would be overall performance. We are engaged in a dialogue with those users to benchmark Iroha and expand the scope of its uses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our community has expressed an interest in using Iroha's codebase as something that can reliably run on the embedded SoCs, similar to those found in modern mobile phones. They could compile Iroha on different ARM SoCs with limited RAM and help test it in new conditions. While this isn't a priority, Rust allows such ports to function well, and the main concern would be overall performance. We are engaged in dialogue with those users to benchmark Iroha and expand its use scope.
```

We are also excited about the opportunity to participate in the Hyperledger [AI FAQ](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/aifaq) project and contribute our documentation.

> 

Reviewer 3: It would be good to see a goal about improving contributor and maintainer diversity. From the Project Health section it appears Iroha is open and welcoming to new contributors, I'd recommend to make it an explicit goal.

Reviewer 4: @6r1d : It would be great to see a plan for how you will improve the contributor and maintainer diversity that you could present to the @hyperledger/toc. This is a concern that was brought up during the last TOC meeting regarding whether Iroha meets the graduated status. Would you be willing to create this plan and present at a future TOC meeting?

Author: Hello. We've gained some experience from interacting with the mentees and our intern. We'll discuss Iroha's plan to attract the contributors to the TOC meeting in detail.

Reviewer 4: Hi, @6r1d : This week, we will be discussing SigStore and Scorecard and may not have time for this discussion on the agenda. I would recommend that we shoot for the March 7th meeting to discuss in detail with the @hyperledger/toc. Would that work for you?

> We are also excited to have a chance to participate in the Hyperledger [AI FAQ](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/aifaq) project and contribute our documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are also excited about the opportunity to participate in the Hyperledger [AI FAQ](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/aifaq) project and contribute our documentation.
```

# Help Required

> Since we expect Iroha 2 to grow, we would like to request support for our PR effort, intending to report the project's results. For now, the projects we can mention are [Bokolo Cash](https://soramitsu.co.jp/bokolo-cash), Bakong, and [Fraud Intelligence Limited](https://soramitsu.co.jp/fil-2023-in-review).

Reviewer 2: Nice to have a link for Bakong -- perhaps this?  https://bakong.nbc.gov.kh/download/NBC_BAKONG_White_Paper.pdf. Or is there something that talks more specifically about the use Iroha?

> Since we expect Iroha 2 to grow, we'd like to request help with our PR effort, intending to report the project's results. For now, the projects we can mention are the [Bokolo Cash](https://soramitsu.co.jp/bokolo-cash), Bakong and [Fraud Intelligence Limited](https://soramitsu.co.jp/fil-2023-in-review).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we expect Iroha 2 to grow, we would like to request support for our PR effort, intending to report the project's results. For now, the projects we can mention are [Bokolo Cash](https://soramitsu.co.jp/bokolo-cash), Bakong, and [Fraud Intelligence Limited](https://soramitsu.co.jp/fil-2023-in-review).
```

# [Project Lifecycle](https://toc.hyperledger.org/governing-documents/project-lifecycle.html) Stage Recommendation

> Hyperledger Iroha project should remain [graduated](https://toc.hyperledger.org/governing-documents/project-lifecycle.html#graduated).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hyperledger Iroha should remain [graduated](https://toc.hyperledger.org/governing-documents/project-lifecycle.html#graduated).
```

> Its code improved with the use of Rust. Interest in Iroha 2 is growing, and we expect it to gain deployments following its release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its code has improved with the use of Rust. Interest in Iroha 2 is growing and we expect it to gain deployments following its release.
```
